THE VENGEANCE OF FELIX

By Jos√© de Medeiros E Albuquerque (1867- )

Member of the Brazilian Academy of Letters


Old Felix had followed his trade of digger in all the quarries that Rio
de Janeiro possessed. He was a sort of Hercules with huge limbs, but
otherwise stupid as a post. His companions had nicknamed him Hardhead
because of his obstinate character. Once an idea had penetrated his
skull it would stick there like a gimlet and the devil himself couldn't
pull it out. Because of this trait there arose quarrels, altercations
on points of the smallest significance, which the man's acquaintances
would purposely bring up, knowing his evil humor. But Felix, despite
his vigorous and sanguine constitution, was by no means quick to anger,
nor immediately responsive to injury; on the contrary he was
exceedingly patient in his vindictiveness. For the longest time he
would ruminate upon his vengeance, most astutely, and he would carry it
out at the moment when he believed himself perfectly secure. Oh! His
ruses were not of very great finesse and required very little talent;
but by dint of considering and reconsidering the case, by dint of
waiting patiently for the propitious opportunity to present itself, he
finally would play some evil trick upon his comrades. So that nobody
liked him.

Felix had married, but his wife did not long survive. Just long enough
to leave him a son and a daughter, who grew up knowing little
restraint, chumming around with all the good-for-nothings of the
vicinity, plaguing all the neighbors, who on their part, were not slow
to punish the rascals. Thus several years went by. The son became a
notorious character, the daughter an impudent, cynical little runabout
who, on certain occasions, would fill their rickety abode with her
chatter about affairs concerning the "man" of so-and-so or
such-and-such. And thus things were going when the old man took it into
his head to fall ill. An excruciating rheumatism attacked both his
legs, rendering him incapable of moving about, and confining him to an
old, lame armchair that was balanced by a complicated arrangement of
old boxes that could never be got to remain steady. The illness became
chronic. The daughter helped out the finances of the house with her
earnings as laundry-woman ... and perhaps by earnings of a different
nature. Anyway, they got along. The old fellow, willy-nilly, spent his
days invariably riveted to his armchair, groaning with pain at the
least movement, swearing, fretting and fuming, despairing of life. And,
since his daughter simply refused from the very beginning to let him
have even a drop of brandy, he was perforce cured of his vice.

Just about this time there happened to them the worst of all possible
adventures. The son, whom the father had not seen for several weeks,
one fine day attacked a peaceful citizen and, with a terrible knife
thrust in the stomach, despatched him to a better world; as to which
event circumstances seemed so contrary that the son allowed himself to
be arrested.

The old man was in the habit of reading his gazette religiously, from
the first line to the last; thus he learned the news. And it was
through the same newspaper that he followed the trial and learned of
his son's conviction. This made him furious, not so much because of the
sentence as because of a special circumstance. The policeman who had
arrested his son was--just think of it!--Bernardo,--yes, Bernardo, his
own neighbor--the same chap who would greet him daily with the ironic
words: "How are things, Felix old boy? And when will you be ready for a
waltz?"

Even on the day of imprisonment and during those that followed Bernardo
had permitted himself these witty remarks.

Bernardo was a _cabra_ of Bahai, a pretentious mulatto whose enormous
head of hair, carefully parted in the middle into two flourishing
masses, was kept so only through the services of odorous pomade that
cost four sous a pot. He had been, in his day, a dishonest political
henchman, well-known for his exploits; then, supported by the liberal
leader whose election he had worked for, he escaped prison and entered
the police service. At that time police officers were called "bats",--a
sobriquet that troubled Bernardo very little. And it had been he--what
anger flashed in old Felix's eyes as he thought of it!--he, whose past
activities would well bear examination, he who had arrested Felix's
son!...

From that moment one preoccupation alone filled Felix's hours--vengeance!
This hatred dominated his existence and became the only power that
could vanquish the ever-growing misery of his broken-down body. The
mere thought that he could not grow well, while the _cabra_ would daily
continue to live in insolent impunity, was enough to give him
convulsions of rage; he would foam at the mouth, gnash his teeth and,
in that obtuse brain of his, concoct scheme upon scheme of vengeance,
almost all of them impracticable, for he was chained to the spot in
stupid impotence.

At times he would wish to call Bernardo and with thunderous violence
pour torrents of insult upon his head. But what end would that serve?
Felix's treacherous, cowardous nature counselled him to have prudence.
So, on the first days after the arrest, when the mulatto would go by,
the old man feigned slumber. Then, in the continuing uncertainty as to
what method of vengeance to pursue, and in order not to let his hatred
betray itself, he spoke to the policeman as if nothing had happened.
Nevertheless there was one thing that puzzled him greatly: his daughter
had said nothing to him about the entire affair. Did she know nothing
about it? It was almost impossible that the mulatto, with his
chatterbox habits, had not spoken of the matter. Had his daughter
feared to shock him with the news? This was all the less probable since
she had never had any particular love for him. Scarcely did a day pass
that she did not call him a "good-for-nothing," "a lazy lout," and
other similar tendernesses. So he breathed not a word, and continued to
ruminate upon his vengeance.

Months rolled on. Far from getting better the illness increased. As
soon as the old fellow tried to move, horrible pains seized him at
every joint. His daughter maltreated him, and at the height of his
attacks she would reply to his complaints that he'd do better if he
left the house, and she even threatened to send him to the hospital. It
was now June. The weather was one long succession of heavy rains; the
invalid suffered atrociously from the cold and the damp, and his
daughter, disgruntled at the bad weather, which interfered with her
washing, lived in unbroken sulkiness. She treated him worse than a dog,
and it was truly with the patience of a dog that he endured everything,
so much did he fear being sent away. A plan of vengeance had arisen in
his brain, and slowly, during the months, ever since he had learned
that his case was incurable, his project had absorbed his entire mental
activity,--indeed, his whole existence. He breathed only for his plan,
for the sure, propitious opportunity.

At last it came, and a terrible day it was. At dusk his daughter had
left, closing the door, as was her habit, and had not returned at
night. The old man was parched with thirst and his physical torture had
doubled. He resolved upon quick action.

In the morning,--it might have been about seven o'clock--his daughter
returned, or rather, rolled into the room, and with her, pell-mell came
"Jane", Bernardo's "friend". Jane was roundly berating his daughter.
"You rotten thing!" she cried. "I'll show you! Trying to take away
somebody else's man." And the two women came to blows, rousing the
entire neighborhood. They tried at last to separate the combatants, but
it would have been easier to break them to bits, so fiercely did they
struggle against each other. There was a whistle; the police arrived,
and the women were taken to the lock-up. All this as quick as a flash.

The old man had not had time to utter a word. But an extreme rage,
blind,--an anger such as only savage beasts can know, overpowered him.
What! His daughter, the mistress of Bernardo! This was the last straw!

Towards noon the mulatto came back. He had spent the night away from
home, under the pretext of a special patrol; he returned, ignorant of
the morning's events. He came in smiling, in that measured walk of his,
waddling along. He approached Felix and asked him the classic question:
"Now then, how goes it?"

Felix did not reply and merely made a sign with his hand. The policeman
entered. When he had come near, Felix said to him in a low voice that
he had something very serious to tell him. But first of all he insisted
that Bernardo go and bring his large knife.

"Why that, Felix? What do you want to do with a knife?" asked the
other.

The old man smiled mysteriously. "Quick, my boy, I'll tell you
afterwards, and you'll see that my story will be worth the trouble."

"All right, I'll get it," replied the officer. And a minute later he
was back with the knife, which he gave to the invalid.

"Now," continued the latter, "go and close the door, so that nobody
will hear. Close it well, and turn the key."

Bernardo felt some mistrust at all this mystery, but knowing for
certain that the helpless old man could do him no harm, he obeyed,
curiously waiting to learn what the other was up to.

"So, you want to tell me now?--Not yet! Here, first put this watch in
your pocket." And the old man drew from his pocket an ancient nickel
watch which he gave to the _cabra_.

"What am I to do with this, Felix?" asked the mulatto.

"Keep it, I tell you," was the reply.

"The old duffer is crazy for sure," thought Bernardo, nevertheless
doing as he was told. Then, seeing in what manner the invalid had
grasped the knife he discreetly withdrew a few paces.

Well, almost immediately Felix made a sudden movement that caused his
pain to increase anew, and he began to groan, to utter most terrible
cries, almost shrieks.

"I am dying! I am dying!"

Bernardo had never heard such awful groaning; his mistrust grew, and,
seeing that the old man still clutched the knife, he thought the
invalid would kill him if he should attempt to approach. He therefore
again stepped back a few paces and awaited developments, persuaded that
he had a lunatic in front of him. The groaning became louder and
louder, so that it was easily to be heard outside. Finally, the
_cabra_, tired of waiting, said, "I'll be back right away, Felix." And
he was about to leave.

Brusquely, the old man uncovered his own breast, and with a rapid
movement, right over the heart, he thrust in the blade with all his
might, up to the hilt. Not a drop of blood spurted out, the thick blade
obstructing the wound. His face convulsed with an expression of
excruciating torment; his hanging arms grew rigid.

The officer rushed to the door, opened it, called for help and returned
to pull the knife from the wound, and to see whether it was yet
possible to save the unfortunate man. Men and women, wildly excited,
ran up to the house crying loudly, and, seeing this man with a long
knife whence the blood was dripping, seeing also the pierced breast of
old Felix, the whole populace rushed upon Bernardo, disarmed him,
crying "Kill him! Kill him!" Bernardo was punched and kicked and
cudgelled from one infuriated person to the other in the crowd, and led
to the police-station by a multitude which every moment waxed greater
and more threatening.

Several months later the trial came to an end. Bernardo was sentenced
to hard labor for life. Nobody would believe his story. The proofs were
overwhelming. Had he not been caught red-handed? The presence of the
nickel-watch in his pocket indicated sufficiently that the motive of
the crime was robbery. The vengeance of old Felix had been well
calculated: the result was there. The old man had conquered.